Code 00                                  Initialize the System

Input registers - none.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    The SCSI Reset line is asserted and deasserted followed by a delay of 
    about 2 seconds. After the delay, each drive that was recognized during 
    the boot operation is issued a Recalibrate command, and if an error is 
    returned, the status is read via a Request Sense Command. This clears out
    any error status that  may have been caused by the reset.

    The status from the request sense command is not returned to the caller 
    as this is done for every disk connected to the adapter.
    
Code 01                                  -Request Sense

Input registers - none.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    A SCSI Request Sense is issued to the specified disk. The results of the 
    command are converted to the BIOS Error Code and returned in AH/AL.

    Pre 4.0L, 1.0E, 5.0C BIOS used the non-extended request sense format, and
    the four bytes returned by the device are stored in the data table 
    (except 5.X series).

Code 02                                  -Disk Read

Input registers - as defined under general assignment.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    Two internal parameters are used to convert the caller's head, sector, and
    cylinder number to a SCSI logical block number. These parameters are the 
    heads per cylinder and sectors per track numbers. The source of these 
    numbers is discussed under Codes 08 and 19. If the drive has 256 byte 
    sectors, the logical block number and the length are multiplied by two 
    before being sent to the drive.

    If the SCSI bus is not in an idle condition at the start of the command 
    execution, an Initialize System (Code 00) is executed and an error return
    made to the caller.

    A SCSI Read command (08) is issued to the specified disk. The BIOS then 
    waits for SCSI Request to be asserted. When it is asserted, a check is 
    made to verify that SCSI C/D is not asserted. If C/D is asserted, 
    operation proceeds directly to the Status/Message phase.

    Data is transferred in blocks of 512 and 256 bytes, depending on the 
    drive's sector size. After the request is detected, a sector sized block
    is transferred to the caller's buffer. If the  transfer is complete,
    the operation proceeds to the Status/Message phase; otherwise, it waits 
    again for the SCSI Request line to be asserted.

    If there is an error reported in the Status/Message phase of the
    operation, the SCSI Request Sense command is issued and the results 
    returned as an error in AH/AL.

Code 03                                  -Disk Write

Identical to the Disk Read, Code 02, with the exception that a SCSI Write 
command (0A0) is issued to the specified drive.

Code 04                                  -Disk Verify

Input registers - As defined under general assignment except for the ES:BX. 
There is no buffer associated with this command.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    This command is executed in the same manner as the Disk Read with the 
    exception that the data read from disk is not stored anywhere. The 
    purpose of this command is to verify that there are no read errors 
    detected.

    If there is an error reported, the SCSI Request Sense command is issued 
    and the results of the Sense command returned in AH/AL.

Code 05                                  -Mode Select

Input registers - ES:BX points to a buffer containing the bytes that are to 
be output during the data phase of the mode select command. Byte 0 contains 
the length of the buffer in bytes to be output. Bytes 1-n are the data bytes.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    The purpose of this command is to send the required parameters to the 
    device in preparation for the issuing of the unit format command. The 
    SCSI Mode Select (15h) command is issued to the specified device. The 
    length of the data phase is taken from byte 0 of the caller's buffer.
    During the data phase of the command, successive bytes are taken from the
    caller's buffer and sent to the device.

    A check is made for SCSI Request asserted, and SCSI C/D deasserted between
    each byte. If C/D is asserted or the buffer is exhausted, the operation 
    proceeds to the Status/Message phase.

    If an error is detected during the Status/Message phase, a SCSI Request 
    Sense is issued and the results returned in AH/AL.

Code 06                                  -Format Unit with Passed List

Input registers - ES:BX points to a buffer containing the bytes of data that 
are to be output during the data phase of the command. Byte 0 contains the 
MSB and byte 1 the LSB of the length(N) of the number of bytes to be output
during the data phase. Bytes 2-N contain the data that is to be output. If the
length is 0, no bytes are output.

DH contains flags that are part of the format command. The specific definition
of the flags to the device are device dependent. This byte is OR'ed with byte
1 of the command before it is output to the device.

AL contains the interleave factor. This is output as byte 4 of the command.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    This command is normally used to send defect lists to the drive for 
    formatting. By changing the flags and the contents of the buffer, this
    could be a format cylinder command, format  unit command, format with
    manufacturer's defect list, format with passed list, format with spares,
    etc. The specific operation is dependent on what the specific disk drive
    manufacturer has implemented.

    The SCSI Format Unit (04) command is issued to the device. The contents 
    of the caller's DH register are OR'ed with the LUN to form byte 1 on the 
    command. The caller's AL register is sent as byte 4 for the interleave.

    The length of the data phase is taken from bytes 0 and 1 of the caller's 
    buffer. Note that the  MSB is in byte 0 and the LSB in byte 1. During the
    data phase of the command, successive  bytes are taken from the caller's 
    buffer and sent to the device.

    A check is made for SCSI Request asserted, and SCSI C/D deasserted between
    each byte. If C/D is asserted or buffer is exhausted, the operation 
    proceeds to the Status/Message phase. There is no timeout for this 
    command. Many devices pick up the data bytes, such as for    defect 
    management,	as they are needed during the formatting operation. As a 
    result, there is no predetermined timeout interval. If the device hangs,
    the system must be restarted.

    If an error is detected during the Status/Message phase, a SCSI Request 
    Sense is issued and  the results returned in AH/AL.











Code 07                                  -Format Unit, No List

Input registers - AL contains the interleave which is output as byte 4 of the command.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    The SCSI Format Unit (04) command is issued to the device. Byte 1 contains only the LUN 
    with no special flags set. Byte 4 is the interactive. After the command is issued, the BIOS 
    waits for the completion by looking for the Status/Message phase of the operation. There is 
    no predetermined length of time to use for a timeout, so if the device hangs, the only method 
    of recovery is to restart the system.

Code 08                                  -Return Parameters

Input registers - none.

Special output registers.

    DH - Number of heads-1
    DL - Number of drives in HF_NUM.
    CH - LSB 8 bits of number of cylinders-1.
    CL - Number of sectors per track + 2 MSB of cylinders - 1.

Operation:

    This function returns the parameters that are used to convert the caller's disk address speci-
    fication into a logical sector number to be issued to the SCSI device. The formula used by 
    the ROM BIOS is:

    Sector=cyl*(HEADS*SECTS)+head*SECTS+(sect-1)

         SECTOR   -Logical sector number
         HEADS    -Number of heads reported for device
         SECTS     -Sectors per track reported for device
         cyl       -Caller specified cylinder number
         head      -Caller specified head number
         sect       -Caller specified sector number

    Note that these values need have no relationship to the actual values on the physical drive 
    for cylinders, heads, and sectors per track. These are only "funny" numbers used for the Int 
    13h call.

    These parameters are based on the standard sector size of 512 bytes. If, in fact, the drive 
    used 256 byte sectors, the fact is masked from the system.

    Before the caller makes an Int 13h call to read, write, or verify a logical sector, the reverse 
    of the above algorithm needs to be performed on the desired logical sector number for set-
    ting up of the registers.








Code OC                                 -Disk Seek

Input registers - As defined under general usage with the exception that there is no use of the 
buffer pointer ES:BX.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    The caller's parameters are converted to a logical sector address in the same manner as is 
    done in the Disk Read command. A SCSI Seek command is issued. All SCSI read and 
    writes have implied seeks.

    WARNING:  There are some "performance" tests on the market that use this BIOS call to 
              check for seek times. With SCSI drives, invalid results are obtained because 
              the parameters returned (See Code 19) are not the actual physical parame-
              ters of the drive.

Code 0E                                  -Read Local Buffer

Input registers - ES:BS points to the caller's 512 byte buffer.

Special output registers - none.

Operation (For Host adapters using BIOS 4.0):

    The contents of a local 512 byte buffer are returned to the caller. This is the same data 
    written out by the Write Local Buffer command. The command is one of the diagnostic tests 
    for the adapter.

Operation (for Host adapters using BIOS 1.0-1.2, 5.0-5.2 or 6.0):

    This command is not implemented. There is insufficient RAM on the adapter to store the 
    required information.

Code 0F                                  -Write Local Buffer

Input registers - ES:BX points to the caller's 512 byte buffer.

Special output registers - none.

Operation (for Host adapters using BIOS 4.0)

    The contents of the caller's buffer are written into the local buffer. This is part of a diagnos-
    tic test of the adapter to be used in conjunction with the Real Local Buffer command to 
    check operation.

Operation (for Host adapters using BIOS 1.0-1.2, 5.0-5.2 or 6.0):

    This command is not implemented.








Code 10                                  -Test Unit Ready

Output registers - none.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    A SCSI Test Unit Ready (00) command is issued to the specified disk. If an error is detected 
    during the Status/Message phase, a SCSI Request Sense is issued and the results returned in 
    AH/AL.

Code 11                                  -Recalibrate

Input registers - none.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    A SCSI Recalibrate (01) command is issued to the specified disk. The resultant status of the 
    command is returned to AH/AL.

Code 12                                  -Drive Stop

Input registers - none.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    A SCSI stop (1Bh) command is issued to the specified disk. Some manufacturers use this 
    command to park the heads in preparation for moving.

Code 13                                  -Request Sense

This is the same as code 01.

Code 14                                  -Adapter Diagnostic

Input registers - none.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    A complete wrap around test is run on the SCSI data path. 256 data patterns are placed on 
    the SCSI data bus and read back for comparison. If there is any difference, an error is re-
    turned in AH/AL.










Code 15                                  -Return DASD

Input registers - none.

Special output registers -

    AX    - 300h to mean that this is a hard disk.

    CX:DX: - Capacity of the addressed disk. If this is zero, the execution of the SCSI Read 
           Capacity command failed. This usually means that the disk needs to be format-
           ted. If the drive has 256 byte sectors, the size information returned is equivalent 
           to 512 byte sectors.


Code 17                             Return Inquiry Information

Input registers - AL=00-Subfunction. ES:BX - pointer to buffer where Inquiry string to be placed. 
Ch-Number of bytes to return. (Not to exceed but could return less.)

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    A SCSI Inquiry (12h) command is issued to the specified disk. The resultant status of the 
    command is returned in AH/AL.

    If an error is detected during the Status/Message phase, a SCSI request sense command is 
    issued and the results returned in AH/AL.

Code 18                             Identify ROM

Input registers - none.

Special output registers -

         AX  - 4321h. This code identifies this as a Future Domain ROM BIOS.

         BH  - Number of disks being supported by this ROM BIOS.

         BL  - Index number for this SCSI disk.

         CH  - ROM Firmware version number. This is 4 for Host adapters using BIOS 
              1.0-1.2, 4.0 or 6.0, and 5 for host adapters using BIOS 5.0-5.2.

         CL  - Drive type code. This is 10 for host adapters using BIOS 1.0-1.2, 4.0 or 6.0 
              and 13 for host adapters using BIOS 5.0-5.2.
Operation:

    The purpose of this command is to locate and identify the address codes that are required for 
    use of the SCSI disks. The Int 13 calls for the SCSI drives are addressed to the hard drives, 
    i.e., disk 0 is 80h, disk 1 is 81h,...Note that this addressing includes internal IBM disks as 
    well as the SCSI disks. This command identifies what the base address is for SCSI disks.

    Assume that there is one internal hard disk and four SCSI disks. Addressing this command 
    to hard disk address 82h would result in BH=4 and BL=1. That means that there are 4 SCSI 
    disks and that this is the second disk, i.e., they are numbered 1, 1,... The base address for the 
    SCSI disks is therefore 82h-1=h1h, or SCSI disk 0 is address 81h, SCSI disk 1 address is 
    82h,....

    If this command is issued to an IBM disk controller, it will return an error code.

Code 19                                  -Read Drive Capacity

Input registers - none.

Special output registers - Same as for Code 15.

Note:     Future Domain ROM BIOS' write protect removable media drives until this call is 
         made. This is designed to protect data on removable cartridges until a driver that 
         understands removable media makes this call.

Operation:

    A SCSI Read Capacity (25h) command is issued to the specified disk. All of the command 
    bytes are set to zero. The following parameters are then updated in the internal table for the 
    disk. See Code 1Bh for a complete explanation of the internal table.

    Total Capacity - This is a double work parameter. The capacity is returned as the number of 
    equivalent 512 byte sectors.

    The number of heads, sectors per track, and cylinders are calculated as follows: The number 
    of sectors per track is fixed at 17 because there are some RAM BIOS systems which use that 
    as a fixed assumption and will not work with a different number. The number of cylinders 
    cannot exceed 1024 as this is the maximum field size. Therefore, the total capacity is divid-
    ed by 1024 and the result divided by 17. The result is incremented by one and becomes the 
    number of heads. The new heads value is multiplied by 17 and divided into the total capaci-
    ty again with the result becoming the total number of cylinders to use. Note that these 
    numbers will probably not match the physical characteristics of the disk.

Code 1A                            -Read Cylinder Capacity

Input registers - none.

Special output registers - CX:DX is the address of the last logical block of the specified cylinder.

Operation:







    The SCSI Read Capacity (25h) Command is issued to the specified disk with the PMI bit set 
    in byte 8 bit 0 of the command sequence. Note that not all disks support this operation. It is 
    sometimes used for incremental formatting of the disk by cylinder and marking defects by 
    cylinder as on Adaptec controllers.

Code 1B                             -Locate Table 

Input registers - none.

Special output registers - ES:BX points to the internal table maintained for the specified disk.

The table in Host adapters using 1.0-1.2, 4.0 or 6.0 is organized as follows:

      Type     Function

              -Bit 0     Not used

    Char      -Bit 1     is set to cause checking of SCSI bus parity.
              
              -Bit 2     set is for 256 byte sectors, else 512.

              - Bit 3    set is for nonstandard sector size.

              -Bit 4     set for removable drives

              -Bit 5     set for non-valid SCSI devices.

              -Bit 6     set for non-direct access SCSI devices.

              -Bit 7     flag used internally by the ROM.

    Int        -Total number of cylinders calculated in Read Capacity.

    Char      -Total number of heads calculated in Read Capacity

    Char      -Sectors per track, set to 17.
 
    Char      -SCSI selection codes. These are determined during the ROM boot process. 
              Bits 5-3 are the SCSI address of the disk, and bits 2-0 are the LUN of the 
              drive.

    Char      -Ready flag used internally in the ROM. This must be nonzero for the disk to 
              be used.

    Char(4)    -The four bytes from the last SCSI Request Sense command that occurred as 
              a result of an error are saved. This information can be used to assist in further 
              defining any errors that occur or for diagnostic printouts.

    Char(10)    -The command bytes sent that caused the SCSI Request Sense to be issued. 
              This is useful for diagnostic help.









    Long      -Total disk capacity in equivalent 512 byte sectors as returned by the SCSI 
              Read Capacity command. Note that the Read Capacity command actually 
              returns the address of the last sector. This is that number +1.

    Char[24]    -Name of the disk manufacturer as returned by the SCSI Inquiry command. 
              (Not returned in BIOS 6.0.)

The table in the Host adapters using BIOS 5.0-5.2 are organized as follows:

              -Bit 0     Not used

    Char      -Bit 1     is set to cause checking of SCSI bus parity.

              -Bit 2     set is for 256 byte sectors, else 512.

              -Bit 3     set is for nonstandard sector size.

              -Bit 4     set for removable drives.

              -Bit5     set for non valid SCSI drives.

              -Bit 6     Not used

              -Bit 7     Not used

    Int        -Total number of cylinders calculated in Read Capacity.

    Char      -Total number of heads calculated in Read Capacity.

    Char      -Sectors per track, set to 17.

    Char      -SCSI selection codes. These are determined during the ROM boot process. 
              Bits 5-3 are the SCSI address of the disk, and bits 0-2 are the LUN.

    Long      -Total disk capacity in equivalent 512 byte sectors as returned by the SCSI 
              Read Capacity command. Note that the Read Capacity command actually 
              returns the address of the last sector. This is that number +1.

    Note: This command can be used to "unlock the removable drives for Write commands.

Code 1C                            Locate Driver Letter Table

Input registers - none.

    
Special output registers - ES:BS points to a character array that could be used by utilities or a 
loadable driver as a table of drive letters. In Host adapters using BIOS 1.0-1.2 and 6.0, this table is 
26 bytes long and in Host adapters using BIOS 4.0 and 5.0-5.2 the table is 6 bytes long.

