Code 1B                             -Locate Table 

Input registers - none.

Special output registers - ES:BX points to the internal table maintained for 
the specified disk.

The table in Host adapters using 1.0-1.2, 4.0 or 6.0 is organized as follows:

      Type     Function

              -Bit 0     Not used

    Char      -Bit 1     is set to cause checking of SCSI bus parity.
              
              -Bit 2     set is for 256 byte sectors, else 512.

              -Bit 3     set is for nonstandard sector size.

              -Bit 4     set for removable drives

              -Bit 5     set for non-valid SCSI devices.

              -Bit 6     set for non-direct access SCSI devices.

              -Bit 7     flag used internally by the ROM.

    Int       -Total number of cylinders calculated in Read Capacity.

    Char      -Total number of heads calculated in Read Capacity

    Char      -Sectors per track, set to 17.
 
    Char      -SCSI selection codes. These are determined during the ROM boot
               process. Bits 5-3 are the SCSI address of the disk, and 
               bits 2-0 are the LUN of the drive.

    Char      -Ready flag used internally in the ROM. This must be nonzero 
               for the disk to be used.

    Char(4)   -The four bytes from the last SCSI Request Sense command that 
               occurred as a result of an error are saved. This information 
               can be used to assist in further defining any errors that 
               occur or for diagnostic printouts.

    Char(10)  -The command bytes sent that caused the SCSI Request Sense to 
               be issued. This is useful for diagnostic help.

    Long      -Total disk capacity in equivalent 512 byte sectors as returned
               by the SCSI Read Capacity command. Note that the Read Capacity
               command actually returns the address of the last sector. This
               is that number +1.

    Char[24]  -Name of the disk manufacturer as returned by the SCSI Inquiry 
               command.   (Not returned in BIOS 6.0.)

The table in the Host adapters using BIOS 5.0-5.2 are organized as follows:

              -Bit 0     Not used

    Char      -Bit 1     is set to cause checking of SCSI bus parity.

              -Bit 2     set is for 256 byte sectors, else 512.

              -Bit 3     set is for nonstandard sector size.

              -Bit 4     set for removable drives.

              -Bit 5     set for non valid SCSI drives.

              -Bit 6     Not used

              -Bit 7     Not used

    Int       -Total number of cylinders calculated in Read Capacity.

    Char      -Total number of heads calculated in Read Capacity.

    Char      -Sectors per track, set to 17.

    Char      -SCSI selection codes. These are determined during the ROM boot
               process. Bits 5-3 are the SCSI address of the disk, and bits 
               0-2 are the LUN.

    Long      -Total disk capacity in equivalent 512 byte sectors as returned
               by the SCSI Read Capacity command. Note that the Read Capacity
               command actually returns the address of the last sector. This
               is that number +1.

    Note: This command can be used to "unlock the removable drives for Write 
          commands.

