Code 06                                  -Format Unit with Passed List

Input registers - ES:BX points to a buffer containing the bytes of data that 
are to be output during the data phase of the command. Byte 0 contains the 
MSB and byte 1 the LSB of the length(N) of the number of bytes to be output
during the data phase. Bytes 2-N contain the data that is to be output. If the
length is 0, no bytes are output.

DH contains flags that are part of the format command. The specific definition
of the flags to the device are device dependent. This byte is OR'ed with byte
1 of the command before it is output to the device.

AL contains the interleave factor. This is output as byte 4 of the command.

Special output registers - none.

Operation:

    This command is normally used to send defect lists to the drive for 
    formatting. By changing the flags and the contents of the buffer, this
    could be a format cylinder command, format  unit command, format with
    manufacturer's defect list, format with passed list, format with spares,
    etc. The specific operation is dependent on what the specific disk drive
    manufacturer has implemented.

    The SCSI Format Unit (04) command is issued to the device. The contents 
    of the caller's DH register are OR'ed with the LUN to form byte 1 on the 
    command. The caller's AL register is sent as byte 4 for the interleave.

    The length of the data phase is taken from bytes 0 and 1 of the caller's 
    buffer. Note that the  MSB is in byte 0 and the LSB in byte 1. During the
    data phase of the command, successive  bytes are taken from the caller's 
    buffer and sent to the device.

    A check is made for SCSI Request asserted, and SCSI C/D deasserted between
    each byte. If C/D is asserted or buffer is exhausted, the operation 
    proceeds to the Status/Message phase. There is no timeout for this 
    command. Many devices pick up the data bytes, such as for    defect 
    management,	as they are needed during the formatting operation. As a 
    result, there is no predetermined timeout interval. If the device hangs,
    the system must be restarted.

    If an error is detected during the Status/Message phase, a SCSI Request 
    Sense is issued and  the results returned in AH/AL.

